While our society and culture have been evolving, we have
continuously developed skills to work/collaborate remotely
with other people [46]. Here, collaboration is multi-person
activities to achieve a common goal [12], and could be categorized
into two sectors according to the collaborators’
locations—e.g., whether they stay in the same place or not.
People usually have better collaboration when staying
in the same place rather than when they are in remote
places [22]. People intuitively and immediately shares social/communication cues in co-located collaboration, but
this is not always available in remote collaboration, especially
with conventional remote communication technologies,
e.g., telephone and videoconferencing tools.
Thanks to the recent advances in immersive technologies
with multimodal interfaces, such asVirtual,Augmented,
and Mixed Reality (VR/AR/MR) with support for gesture
and gaze input, we encounter a new era of technologically
enhanced remote collaboration with unique opportunities
and challenges [19,37]. In remote collaboration studies,
AR/VR/MR technologies have been used for visually showing
spatial information in the real world task scene, and for
providing an identical environment of the task scene to the
remote collaborator who is not in the task space [2].
There have been a few research events related to this
remote collaboration, for example, VR in VR: IEEE VRWorkshop
on Virtual Conferencing, 3DCVE: IEEE VR Workshop
on 3D Collaborative Virtual Environments, MVAR: ISMAR
Workshop on Multimodal Virtual & Augmented Reality, and
CoMiRE: ISMAR Workshop on Collaborative Mixed Reality
Environments. However, there was a lack of academic journals,
which could provide comprehensive yet novel findings and knowledge, particularly focusing on AR/VR/MR remote
collaboration with multimodal input.
In this special issue, we compiled a collection of high
quality contributions that reflect the latest state of the art
of research in AR/VR/MR remote collaboration, and share
research on multimodal interfaces and communication cues
while providing insights for the future research. All submitted
paperswere peer-reviewed, and five accepted paperswere
selected based on their research quality and significance of
the contribution to the existing literature. As an introduction
to our special issue, this editorial describes the definition
of the remote collaboration with five constructing factors,
briefly summarizes the research aspects in remote collaborations,
and introduces the five accepted feature papers.
Finally, we will discuss some potential future research directions
while concluding the editorial.
