As mentioned earlier, collaboration can happen in different
distance settings, either among co-located users in the same
place (face to face collaboration), or between distributed
users in remote places (remote collaboration). Remote collaboration
has been studied in term of the collaborative performance
and the user’s perception for more than two decades
in different research fields, such as telecommunication and
social psychology. While there are dramatic advances in
mobile and immersive technologies, e.g., VR/AR/MR, pervasive
and personal mobile/wearable computing, the potential
of such technologies is growing in collaboration tasks
where multiple remote users are equipped with personal and
immersive devices. Not surprising, research on remote collaboration
is receiving more and more attention from not
only the expert researchers and practitioners, but also public
consumers, with the rapid development and enhancement of
such technologies.
One of the common remote collaboration scenarios is
a remote-expert and local-novice collaboration in different
application contexts. The main purpose of this collaboration
is to increase the availability of a remote expert, so that the
local novice users could get help from the remote expert
anywhere and anytime with appropriate technological supports.
For example, a local novice might experience a broken
machine that needs an expert’s help repairing, a local doctor
with little expertise might need to conduct an operation on a
patient with the essential help from a distant expert surgeon,
or a crime scene investigator could need help from a forensics
expert in a remote place.
Here, we describe five essential factors for remote collaboration
before addressing relevant research aspects in the
following sections: (1) tasks, (2) local users, (3) remote users,
(4) communication, and (5) tools for collaboration.
(1) Task: Since collaboration is a multi-person activity
for a shared goal, there should be a task that collaborators
are trying to complete together. A task often
involves task objects that collaboratorsmanipulate. Several
researchers reported that the result of the remote collaboration
can be task dependent because the required
object manipulation could be different depending on the
task type [28]. For example, a task for selecting an object
most likely requires the object’s position information
shown with a pointing operation, but tasks like fixing a
car or a bike require both position and orientation information
for more complex object manipulation.
(2) Local user A local user is a person who is in the place
where the task and the task objects are normally located
[37]. The local user requests a help from a remote user
who might have expert knowledge to complete the task.
In a conventional setting like the remote-expert and
local-novice scenario, the local user would manipulate
task objects following the remote user’s guidance.
(3) Remote user As opposed to the local user, a remote user
is a person who provides information and guidance to
the local user for completing the shared task [37]. The
remote user normally does not stay at the place where
the task objects are, but usually communicates with the
local user to show or tell them what to do for the task.
(4) Communication Communication is the activity that the
users perform to share their thoughts and intent while
completing the task together. It involves using various
communication cues, such as verbal and nonverbal
behaviors, to establish common ground, improve the
quality of communication, and eventually complete the
task successfully. For example, the remote user may
explain the solution to the local user using communication
cues [27]. Verbal cues are usually considered
as more fundamental and basic communication cues,
but they have various limitations because of the lack
of visual representations, which are often intuitive and
efficient. Therefore, many remote collaboration systems
employ visual communication cues, such as a pointer,
sketching, and hand gestures, in addition to verbal communication.
(5) Awareness tool/interface Since the local and remote
users are in different spaces, there should be a awareness
tool (or an interface) to show the current state of the
task and the activity progress [24]. Sharing the users’
views is common feature of the collaboration interface,
often using conventional video conferencing systems.
The local and remote user’s collaborative activities can
be shown in the shared view(s), and communication cues
also visually displayed. It is important to understand that
the affordances of the collaboration tools can determine
the quality of communication and so the general user
experience and collaboration performance.
Considering these five factors for remote collaboration,
researchers have mainly studied three research aspects: (1)
understanding of the effects of individual communication
cues and the combinations of multimodal cues, (2) sharing
the view of the task space for user awareness, and (3) human
factors that include perception and cognition research and
the investigation of user profiles. We will cover these three
research aspects in the following sections.
