Another important aspect that influences the collaboration
experience in remote settings is to share the user’s view with
the collaboration partner. For example, the local user’s view
can be shared with the remote expert so that he/she can understand
the task progress by watching the shared view [16,34].
This sharing view feature is particularly important because
the users could not only see the current state of the task, but
they could also put themselves in another person’s shoes. In
collaboration, social understanding and grounding are crucial
for developing better communication and rapport among the
collaborators [32]. The view sharing methods are advancing
both quantitatively and qualitatively, for example use of high
definition shared views, large panoramic views, and immersive
technology like first-person VR experience [44].
In the early stage of remote collaboration technologies,
researchers used a video conferencing system that could only
show a simple live video of the task space [9] and the live
video was streamed from a fixed camera on the local user’s
head or environment [29]. With a handheld tablet, it was
not convenient to share the local user’s perspective with the
remote users because the user’s hands should be occupied
by holding the tablet/camera while they also need to perform
the given task [8]. Recent compact wearable camera systems, such as GoPro cameras [41], or see-through head-mounted
displays (HMDs) with embedded cameras, like Microsoft
HoloLens, could free the user’s hands and make viewsharing
simple and easy.
While the shared view or the layout can be independently
controlled by the remote/local user, some researchers stitched
the images from a live video and then constructed a large
image covering the overall task space [10,17].With the large
image, the remote expert could have an independent view
regardless of the current viewpoint of local user’s live video
and freely navigate around the task space. For example, Lee et
al. [36] introduced a system sharing a 360-degree live video,
so both local and remote users could individually control the
viewpoint in the 360-degree simulated environment. Piumsomboon
et al. [42] also developed a system that can share a
3D reconstructed environment of the local user’s task space
and support both local and remote users’ navigation in the
environment.
